<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 1</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. The palace of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philostrate</b>, and Attendants.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Draws on apace; four happy days bring in</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Another moon: but, O, methinks, how slow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This old moon wanes! she lingers my desires,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a step-dame or a dowager</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Long withering out a young man’s revenue.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hippolyta</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Four days will quickly steep themselves in night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Four nights will quickly dream away the time;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then the moon, like to a silver bow</span>
									<br/>
									<span>New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of our solemnities.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, Philostrate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn melancholy forth to funerals;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pale companion is not for our pomp. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philostrate</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hippolyta, I woo’d thee with my sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And won thy love, doing thee injuries;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I will wed thee in another key,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With pomp, with triumph and with revelling.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Egeus</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Egeus</td>
							<td>Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Thanks, good Egeus: what’s the news with thee?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Egeus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Full of vexation come I, with complaint</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against my child, my daughter Hermia.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This man hath my consent to marry her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand forth, Lysander: and, my gracious duke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This man hath bewitch’d the bosom of my child:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And interchanged love-tokens with my child:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With feigning voice verses of feigning love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stolen the impression of her fantasy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats, messengers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of strong prevailment in unharden’d youth:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With cunning hast thou filch’d my daughter’s heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn’d her obedience, which is due to me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stubborn harshness: and, my gracious duke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it so she will not here before your grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Consent to marry with Demetrius,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I beg the ancient privilege of Athens,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As she is mine, I may dispose of her:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which shall be either to this gentleman</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or to her death, according to our law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Immediately provided in that case.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What say you, Hermia? be advised, fair maid:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To you your father should be as a god;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One that composed your beauties, yea, and one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom you are but as a form in wax</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By him imprinted and within his power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To leave the figure or disfigure it.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Demetrius is a worthy gentleman.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>So is Lysander.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In himself he is;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But in this kind, wanting your father’s voice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other must be held the worthier.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>I would my father look’d but with my eyes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td>Rather your eyes must with his judgment look.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I do entreat your grace to pardon me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know not by what power I am made bold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor how it may concern my modesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In such a presence here to plead my thoughts;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I beseech your grace that I may know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The worst that may befall me in this case,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I refuse to wed Demetrius.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Either to die the death or to abjure</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forever the society of men.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Know of your youth, examine well your blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether, if you yield not to your father’s choice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You can endure the livery of a nun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For aye to be in shady cloister mew’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To live a barren sister all your life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To undergo such maiden pilgrimage;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But earthlier happy is the rose distill’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than that which withering on the virgin thorn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grows, lives and dies in single blessedness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere I will yield my virgin patent up</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My soul consents not to give sovereignty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take time to pause; and, by the next new moon⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sealing-day betwixt my love and me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For everlasting bond of fellowship⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon that day either prepare to die</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For disobedience to your father’s will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or on Diana’s altar to protest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For aye austerity and single life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Relent, sweet Hermia: and, Lysander, yield</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy crazed title to my certain right.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You have her father’s love, Demetrius;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let me have Hermia’s: do you marry him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Egeus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Scornful Lysander! true, he hath my love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what is mine my love shall render him.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she is mine, and all my right of her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do estate unto Demetrius.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am, my lord, as well derived as he,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As well possess’d; my love is more than his;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My fortunes every way as fairly rank’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not with vantage, as Demetrius’;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, which is more than all these boasts can be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am beloved of beauteous Hermia:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should not I then prosecute my right?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Demetrius, I’ll avouch it to his head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made love to Nedar’s daughter, Helena,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this spotted and inconstant man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Theseus</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I must confess that I have heard so much,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, being over-full of self-affairs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And come, Egeus; you shall go with me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have some private schooling for you both.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fit your fancies to your father’s will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else the law of Athens yields you up⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which by no means we may extenuate⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To death, or to a vow of single life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, my Hippolyta: what cheer, my love?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Demetrius and Egeus, go along:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must employ you in some business</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against our nuptial and confer with you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of something nearly that concerns yourselves.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Egeus</td>
							<td>With duty and desire we follow you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt all but <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How now, my love! why is your cheek so pale?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How chance the roses there do fade so fast?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Belike for want of rain, which I could well</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beteem them from the tempest of mine eyes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay me! for aught that ever I could read,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could ever hear by tale or history,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The course of true love never did run smooth;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, either it was different in blood⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>O cross! too high to be enthrall’d to low.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td>Or else misgraffed in respect of years⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>O spite! too old to be engaged to young.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td>Or else it stood upon the choice of friends⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>O hell! to choose love by another’s eyes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Making it momentany as a sound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swift as a shadow, short as any dream;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brief as the lightning in the collied night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ere a man hath power to say, “Behold!”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The jaws of darkness do devour it up:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So quick bright things come to confusion.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If then true lovers have ever cross’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It stands as an edict in destiny:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then let us teach our trial patience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because it is a customary cross,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wishes and tears, poor fancy’s followers.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A good persuasion: therefore, hear me, Hermia.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have a widow aunt, a dowager</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of great revenue, and she hath no child:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Athens is her house remote seven leagues;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she respects me as her only son.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to that place the sharp Athenian law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me, then,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Steal forth thy father’s house tomorrow night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the wood, a league without the town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where I did meet thee once with Helena,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do observance to a morn of May,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There will I stay for thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My good Lysander!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I swear to thee, by Cupid’s strongest bow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By his best arrow with the golden head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the simplicity of Venus’ doves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And by that fire which burn’d the Carthage queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the false Trojan under sail was seen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By all the vows that ever men have broke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In number more than ever women spoke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In that same place thou hast appointed me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tomorrow truly will I meet with thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td>Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>God speed fair Helena! whither away?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Call you me fair? that fair again unsay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Demetrius loves your fair: O happy fair!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your eyes are lode-stars; and your tongue’s sweet air</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More tuneable than lark to shepherd’s ear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sickness is catching: O, were favour so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My tongue should catch your tongue’s sweet melody.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The rest I’ld give to be to you translated.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, teach me how you look, and with what art</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You sway the motion of Demetrius’ heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td>O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>I give him curses, yet he gives me love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td>O that my prayers could such affection move!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>The more I hate, the more he follows me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td>The more I love, the more he hateth me.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td>None, but your beauty: would that fault were mine!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Take comfort: he no more shall see my face;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lysander and myself will fly this place.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the time I did Lysander see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seem’d Athens as a paradise to me:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, then, what graces in my love do dwell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he hath turn’d a heaven into hell!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Helen, to you our minds we will unfold:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tomorrow night, when Phoebe doth behold</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her silver visage in the watery glass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A time that lovers’ flights doth still conceal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through Athens’ gates have we devised to steal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And in the wood, where often you and I</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon faint primrose-beds were wont to lie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There my Lysander and myself shall meet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thence from Athens turn away our eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To seek new friends and stranger companies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, sweet playfellow: pray thou for us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep word, Lysander: we must starve our sight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From lovers’ food till morrow deep midnight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will, my Hermia. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Helena, adieu:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As you on him, Demetrius dote on you! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How happy some o’er other some can be!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through Athens I am thought as fair as she.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He will not know what all but he do know:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as he errs, doting on Hermia’s eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I, admiring of his qualities:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Things base and vile, holding no quantity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love can transpose to form and dignity:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore is wing’d Cupid painted blind:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor hath Love’s mind of any judgment taste;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore is Love said to be a child,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because in choice he is so oft beguiled.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As waggish boys in game themselves forswear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So the boy Love is perjured everywhere:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For ere Demetrius look’d on Hermia’s eyne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hail’d down oaths that he was only mine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will go tell him of fair Hermia’s flight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then to the wood will he tomorrow night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pursue her; and for this intelligence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I have thanks, it is a dear expense:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But herein mean I to enrich my pain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have his sight thither and back again. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Athens. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</b>’s house.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Snug</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Flute</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Snout</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Starveling</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Is all our company here?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Here is the scroll of every man’s name, which is thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our interlude before the duke and duchess, on his wedding-day at night.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Marry, our play is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The most lamentable comedy, and most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisbe</i>.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>
								<p>That will ask some tears in the true performing of it: if I do it, let the audience look to their eyes; I will move storms, I will condole in some measure. To the rest: yet my chief humour is for a tyrant: I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in, to make all split.</p>
								<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>The raging rocks</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And shivering shocks</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Shall break the locks</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">Of prison gates;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And Phibbus’ car</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Shall shine from far</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And make and mar</span>
										<br/>
										<span class="i1">The foolish Fates.</span>
									</p>
								</blockquote>
								<p>This was lofty! Now name the rest of the players. This is Ercles’ vein, a tyrant’s vein; a lover is more condoling.</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Francis Flute, the bellows-mender.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Flute</td>
							<td>Here, Peter Quince.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Flute, you must take Thisby on you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Flute</td>
							<td>What is Thisby? a wandering knight?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>It is the lady that Pyramus must love.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Flute</td>
							<td>Nay, faith, let not me play a woman; I have a beard coming.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>That’s all one: you shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small as you will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>And I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too, I’ll speak in a monstrous little voice, “Thisne, Thisne;” “Ah Pyramus, my lover dear! thy Thisbe dear, and lady dear!”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>No, no; you must play Pyramus: and, Flute, you Thisby.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>Well, proceed.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Robin Starveling, the tailor.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Starveling</td>
							<td>Here, Peter Quince.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe’s mother. Tom Snout, the tinker.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Snout</td>
							<td>Here, Peter Quince.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You, Pyramus’ father: myself, Thisby’s father. Snug, the joiner; you, the lion’s part: and, I hope, here is a play fitted.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Snug</td>
							<td>Have you the lion’s part written? pray you, if it be, give it me, for I am slow of study.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>Let me play the lion too: I will roar, that I will do any man’s heart good to hear me; I will roar, that I will make the duke say “Let him roar again, let him roar again.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>An you should do it too terribly, you would fright the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; and that were enough to hang us all.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">All</td>
							<td>That would hang us, every mother’s son.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>I grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us: but I will aggravate my voice so that I will roar you as gently as any sucking dove; I will roar you an ’twere any nightingale.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a sweet-faced man; a proper man, as one shall see in a summer’s day; a most lovely gentleman-like man: therefore you must needs play Pyramus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best to play it in?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Why, what you will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>I will discharge it in either your straw-colour beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your French-crown-colour beard, your perfect yellow.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play barefaced. But, masters, here are your parts: and I am to entreat you, request you and desire you, to con them by tomorrow night; and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city, we shall be dogged with company, and our devices known. In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties, such as our play wants. I pray you fail me not.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>We will meet; and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously. Take pains; be perfect: adieu.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Quince</td>
							<td>At the duke’s oak we meet.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bottom</td>
							<td>Enough; hold, or cut bow-strings. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
