<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></h3>
				<p>A wood near Athens.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter, from opposite sides, a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fairy</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td>How now, spirit! whither wander you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fairy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Over hill, over dale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thorough bush, thorough brier,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Over park, over pale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thorough flood, thorough fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do wander everywhere,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Swifter than the moon’s sphere;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I serve the fairy queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dew her orbs upon the green.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The cowslips tall her pensioners be:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In their gold coats spots you see;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those be rubies, fairy favours,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In those freckles live their savours:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must go seek some dewdrops here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hang a pearl in every cowslip’s ear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I’ll be gone:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our queen and all her elves come here anon.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king doth keep his revels here tonight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take heed the queen come not within his sight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because that she as her attendant hath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She never had so sweet a changeling;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And jealous Oberon would have the child</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But she perforce withholds the loved boy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now they never meet in grove or green,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But they do square, that all their elves for fear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Creep into acorn-cups and hide them there.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fairy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Either I mistake your shape and making quite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Call’d Robin Goodfellow: are not you he</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That frights the maidens of the villagery;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bootless make the breathless housewife churn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sometime make the drink to bear no barm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You do their work, and they shall have good luck:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are not you he?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thou speak’st aright;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am that merry wanderer of the night.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I jest to Oberon and make him smile</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Neighing in likeness of a filly foal:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sometime lurk I in a gossip’s bowl,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In very likeness of a roasted crab,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when she drinks, against her lips I bob</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on her wither’d dewlap pour the ale.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then slip I from her bum, down topples she,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And “tailor” cries, and falls into a cough;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A merrier hour was never wasted there.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, room, fairy! here comes Oberon.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fairy</td>
							<td>And here my mistress. Would that he were gone!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter, from one side, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</b>, with his train; from the other, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</b>, with hers.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td>Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I have forsworn his bed and company.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td>Tarry, rash wanton: am not I thy lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then I must be thy lady: but I know</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thou hast stolen away from fairy land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the shape of Corin sat all day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Playing on pipes of corn and versing love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come from the farthest steppe of India?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your buskin’d mistress and your warrior love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Theseus must be wedded, and you come</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give their bed joy and prosperity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How canst thou thus for shame, Titania,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Glance at my credit with Hippolyta,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Knowing I know thy love to Theseus?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From Perigenia, whom he ravished?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make him with fair Aegle break his faith,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With Ariadne and Antiopa?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These are the forgeries of jealousy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never, since the middle summer’s spring,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Met we on hill, in dale, forest or mead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By paved fountain or by rushy brook,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or in the beached margent of the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But with thy brawls thou hast disturb’d our sport.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As in revenge, have suck’d up from the sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Contagious fogs; which falling in the land</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath every pelting river made so proud</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they have overborne their continents:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ox hath therefore stretch’d his yoke in vain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath rotted ere his youth attain’d a beard;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fold stands empty in the drowned field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And crows are fatted with the murrion flock;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The nine men’s morris is fill’d up with mud,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the quaint mazes in the wanton green</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For lack of tread are undistinguishable:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The human mortals want their winter here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No night is now with hymn or carol blest:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore the moon, the governess of floods,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pale in her anger, washes all the air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That rheumatic diseases do abound:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thorough this distemperature we see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on old Hiems’ thin and icy crown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is, as in mockery, set: the spring, the summer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The childing autumn, angry winter, change</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By their increase, now knows not which is which:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And this same progeny of evils comes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From our debate, from our dissension;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We are their parents and original.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do you amend it, then; it lies in you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why should Titania cross her Oberon?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do but beg a little changeling boy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be my henchman.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Set your heart at rest:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fairy land buys not the child of me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His mother was a votaress of my order:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in the spiced Indian air, by night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Full often hath she gossip’d by my side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And sat with me on Neptune’s yellow sands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Marking the embarked traders on the flood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When we have laugh’d to see the sails conceive</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Following⁠—her womb then rich with my young squire⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Would imitate, and sail upon the land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fetch me trifles, and return again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As from a voyage, rich with merchandise.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But she, being mortal, of that boy did die;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for her sake do I rear up her boy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for her sake I will not part with him.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td>How long within this wood intend you stay?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Perchance till after Theseus’ wedding-day.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If you will patiently dance in our round</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see our moonlight revels, go with us;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td>Give me that boy, and I will go with thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We shall chide downright, if I longer stay. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</b> with her train.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well, go thy way: thou shalt not from this grove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till I torment thee for this injury.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since once I sat upon a promontory,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And heard a mermaid on a dolphin’s back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That the rude sea grew civil at her song</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And certain stars shot madly from their spheres,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear the sea-maid’s music.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td>I remember.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That very time I saw, but thou couldst not,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flying between the cold moon and the earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cupid all arm’d: a certain aim he took</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At a fair vestal throned by the west,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I might see young Cupid’s fiery shaft</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quench’d in the chaste beams of the watery moon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the imperial votaress passed on,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In maiden meditation, fancy-free.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet mark’d I where the bolt of Cupid fell:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It fell upon a little western flower,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before milk-white, now purple with love’s wound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And maidens call it love-in-idleness.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fetch me that flower; the herb I shew’d thee once:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The juice of it on sleeping eye-lids laid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will make or man or woman madly dote</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the next live creature that it sees.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fetch me this herb; and be thou here again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ere the leviathan can swim a league.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll put a girdle round about the earth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In forty minutes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Having once this juice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll watch Titania when she is asleep,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And drop the liquor of it in her eyes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The next thing then she waking looks upon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it on lion, bear, or wolf, or bull,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On meddling monkey, or on busy ape,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She shall pursue it with the soul of love:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ere I take this charm from off her sight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I can take it with another herb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make her render up her page to me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who comes here? I am invisible;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will overhear their conference.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</b> following him.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I love thee not, therefore pursue me not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is Lysander and fair Hermia?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The one I’ll slay, the other slayeth me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou told’st me they were stolen unto this wood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here am I, and wode within this wood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Because I cannot meet with Hermia.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You draw me, you hard-hearted adamant;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But yet you draw not iron, for my heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is true as steel: leave you your power to draw,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I shall have no power to follow you.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do I entice you? do I speak you fair?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, rather, do I not in plainest truth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell you, I do not, nor I cannot love you?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And even for that do I love you the more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am your spaniel; and, Demetrius,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The more you beat me, I will fawn on you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Neglect me, lose me; only give me leave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unworthy as I am, to follow you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What worser place can I beg in your love⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And yet a place of high respect with me⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than to be used as you use your dog?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I am sick when I do look on thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td>And I am sick when I look not on you.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You do impeach your modesty too much,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To leave the city and commit yourself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Into the hands of one that loves you not;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To trust the opportunity of night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And the ill counsel of a desert place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the rich worth of your virginity.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Your virtue is my privilege: for that</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is not night when I do see your face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore I think I am not in the night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For you in my respect are all the world:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then how can it be said I am alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When all the world is here to look on me?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll run from thee and hide me in the brakes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The wildest hath not such a heart as you.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Run when you will, the story shall be changed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Apollo flies, and Daphne holds the chase;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dove pursues the griffin; the mild hind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Makes speed to catch the tiger; bootless speed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When cowardice pursues and valour flies.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will not stay thy questions; let me go:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, if thou follow me, do not believe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I shall do thee mischief in the wood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, in the temple, in the town, the field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You do me mischief. Fie, Demetrius!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We cannot fight for love, as men may do;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We should be woo’d and were not made to woo. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll follow thee and make a heaven of hell,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To die upon the hand I love so well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fare thee well, nymph: ere he do leave this grove,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Hast thou the flower there? Welcome, wanderer.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td>Ay, there it is.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray thee, give it me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know a bank where the wild thyme blows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where oxlips and the nodding violet grows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Quite over-canopied with luscious woodbine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With sweet musk-roses and with eglantine:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There sleeps Titania sometime of the night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lull’d in these flowers with dances and delight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there the snake throws her enamell’d skin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with the juice of this I’ll streak her eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make her full of hateful fantasies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take thou some of it, and seek through this grove:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sweet Athenian lady is in love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With a disdainful youth: anoint his eyes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But do it when the next thing he espies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May be the lady: thou shalt know the man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the Athenian garments he hath on.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Effect it with some care, that he may prove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More fond on her than she upon her love:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td>Fear not, my lord, your servant shall do so. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>Scene <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></h3>
				<p>Another part of the wood.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</b>, with her train.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Come, now a roundel and a fairy song;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, for the third part of a minute, hence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some war with rere-mice for their leathern wings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make my small elves coats, and some keep back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At our quaint spirits. Sing me now asleep;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then to your offices and let me rest.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fairies</b> sing.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>You spotted snakes with double tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Thorny hedgehogs, be not seen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Newts and blindworms, do no wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Come not near our fairy queen.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Philomel, with melody</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Sing in our sweet lullaby;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lulla, lulla, lullaby; lulla, lulla, lullaby:</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Never harm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Nor spell nor charm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Come our lovely lady nigh;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">So, good night, with lullaby.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weaving spiders come not here;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Hence, you long-legg’d spinners, hence!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beetles black, approach not near;</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Worm nor snail, do no offence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i2">Philomel, with melody, <abbr>etc.</abbr></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">A Fairy</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Hence, away! now all is well:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One aloof stand sentinel. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Fairies</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</b> sleeps.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</b>, and squeezes the flower on <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Titania</b>’s eyelids.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Oberon</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What thou seest when thou dost wake,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do it for thy true-love take,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love and languish for his sake:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it ounce, or cat, or bear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pard, or boar with bristled hair,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In thy eye that shall appear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thou wakest, it is thy dear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wake when some vile thing is near. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to speak troth, I have forgot our way:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll rest us, Hermia, if you think it good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tarry for the comfort of the day.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be it so, Lysander: find you out a bed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I upon this bank will rest my head.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>One turf shall serve as pillow for us both;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One heart, one bed, two bosoms and one troth.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, good Lysander; for my sake, my dear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie further off yet, do not lie so near.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love takes the meaning in love’s conference.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean, that my heart unto yours is knit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that but one heart we can make of it;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Two bosoms interchained with an oath;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So then two bosoms and a single troth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then by your side no bedroom me deny;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For lying so, Hermia, I do not lie.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lysander riddles very prettily:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now much beshrew my manners and my pride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If Hermia meant to say Lysander lied.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, gentle friend, for love and courtesy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lie further off; in human modesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such separation as may well be said</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So far be distant; and, good night, sweet friend:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy love ne’er alter till thy sweet life end!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Amen, amen, to that fair prayer, say I;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then end life when I end loyalty!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here is my bed: sleep give thee all his rest!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td>With half that wish the wisher’s eyes be press’d! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They sleep.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Puck</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Through the forest have I gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Athenian found I none,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On whose eyes I might approve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This flower’s force in stirring love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Night and silence⁠—Who is here?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Weeds of Athens he doth wear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is he, my master said,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Despised the Athenian maid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here the maiden, sleeping sound,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On the dank and dirty ground.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Pretty soul! she durst not lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Churl, upon thy eyes I throw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All the power this charm doth owe.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thou wakest, let love forbid</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sleep his seat on thy eyelid:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So awake when I am gone;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I must now to Oberon. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</b>, running.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td>Stay, though thou kill me, sweet Demetrius.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td>I charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td>O, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Demetrius</td>
							<td>Stay, on thy peril: I alone will go. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, I am out of breath in this fond chase!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The more my prayer, the lesser is my grace.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Happy is Hermia, wheresoe’er she lies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she hath blessed and attractive eyes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How came her eyes so bright? Not with salt tears:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If so, my eyes are oftener wash’d than hers.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, no, I am as ugly as a bear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For beasts that meet me run away for fear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore no marvel though Demetrius</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do, as a monster, fly my presence thus.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What wicked and dissembling glass of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made me compare with Hermia’s sphery eyne?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who is here? Lysander! on the ground!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dead? or asleep? I see no blood, no wound.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lysander, if you live, good sir, awake.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Awaking.</i> And run through fire I will for thy sweet sake.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Transparent Helena! Nature shows art,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That through thy bosom makes me see thy heart.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where is Demetrius? O, how fit a word</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is that vile name to perish on my sword!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Do not say so, Lysander; say not so.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What though he love your Hermia? Lord, what though?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet Hermia still loves you: then be content.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Content with Hermia! No; I do repent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The tedious minutes I with her have spent.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Not Hermia but Helena I love:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who will not change a raven for a dove?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The will of man is by his reason sway’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And reason says you are the worthier maid.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Things growing are not ripe until their season:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So I, being young, till now ripe not to reason;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And touching now the point of human skill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Reason becomes the marshal to my will,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And leads me to your eyes, where I o’erlook</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love’s stories written in love’s richest book.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Helena</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Wherefore was I to this keen mockery born?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When at your hands did I deserve this scorn?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is’t not enough, is’t not enough, young man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I did never, no, nor never can,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius’ eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But you must flout my insufficiency?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In such disdainful manner me to woo.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But fare you well: perforce I must confess</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I thought you lord of more true gentleness.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that a lady, of one man refused,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should of another therefore be abused! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She sees not Hermia. Hermia, sleep thou there:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never mayst thou come Lysander near!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For as a surfeit of the sweetest things</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The deepest loathing to the stomach brings,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as the heresies that men do leave</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are hated most of those they did deceive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou, my surfeit and my heresy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all be hated, but the most of me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, all my powers, address your love and might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To honour Helen and to be her knight! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Hermia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Awaking.</i> Help me, Lysander, help me! do thy best</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lysander, look how I do quake with fear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Methought a serpent eat my heart away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And you sat smiling at his cruel prey.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, out of hearing? gone? no sound, no word?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Alack, where are you? speak, and if you hear;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No? then I well perceive you are not nigh:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either death or you I’ll find immediately. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
